Vash'Knaaren belong to TheTravellingMerchant

This is an extremly quick rundown of their lore and very basic. 

The Vash'Knaaren are an extremly rare race of aliens. Their bodies are composed of an orange crystal which is their main "being" and a stony organic growth which emits out of their bodies, covered by organic metallic bone plates.

After an accident billions of years ago with qauntum technology, their home system ceased to exist, forced into a state of constant flux. The rare Vash'Knaaren who were outside their system during accident work to bring their home back.

Vash'Knaaren exist in many diffferent states at once. Alive, dead, hurt and healed. They do not exist fully until observed. These states do not transcend time, only a possability for their existance at that current time.

Vash'Knaaren are sentient, but not in the same sense as standard life forms. They can still feel and think, just like a human can. They even have their own personalities. Normally, Vash'Knaaren do not count as observers. 

Being observed by another creature pulls them out of their qauntum state and forces them into existance. Younger Vash'Knaaren can handle this with ease, but the older ones, who have spent more of their life only knowing one way of living find it uncomfortable/slightly painful.

Elder Vash'Knaaren are so attuned to living in multiple states at once, they can learn how to manipulate states to their advantage to become greatly inteligent. They are often leaders of other Vash'Knaaren. 

Because elders are so used to living in multiple states, being observed and forced ito existance causes them to go mad with pain. They become unable to think, completely feral.

In extremely rare circumstances, some Vash'knaaren grow into observers at a young age. Skry'knaaren, as they are named by other Vash'Knaaren, are often considered outcasts and shunned, some being forced into exile by the groups elder depending on their disposition. 

That said, some groups of Vash'Knaaren will use Skry'Knaaren in military units, as a trained Skry'Knaaren is able to influence the existance of normal Vash'Knaaren. This means if an outcome of a fight is not favourable, the Skry'Knaaren can can change the state of a defeated Vash'knaaren into one that didn't get hurt. 

Normally, a standard group of Vash'Knaaren aren't much more dangerous then standard soldiers of other races, but as soon as a trained Skry'Knaaren is around, they become a force to be reckoned with.

Lore wise, player Vash'Knaaren are all observers, cast out as Skry'Knaarens.

Vash'Knaaren come in three main forms. Young egg like crystals on stalks, acting kind of like plants. These are their childlike stage without much inteligence. Later they grow into either quadruped or biped forms. Both male and females can be either form, but code wise in Starbound, body types are linked to gender in character creation.

Eventually, extremly old Vash'Knaaren grow into wildly different forms. Elder Vash'Knaaren are rare, as it's hard to avoid being observed for long enough to become one.

Vash'Knaaren that lose their sentience due to madness as they age are often forcibly reverted to lesser beings, making up their buildings and ships in a vast network, a lot like a computer. These Depleated Vash'Knaaren are also used in their firearms. Given a a strong enough electric current, the depleated crystals grow rapidly and shatter, sending sharp shards fowards like a bullet.

A Vash'Knaaren is never truely dead until their crystal is shattered. Their bodies can be broken and will take time to regrow, but they eventually will. Some higher up Vash'Knaaren forcibly grow their crystals into certain shapes with a mould for fashion reasons, much like how humans grow watermelons in specific shapes.

Vash'Knaarens crystals evolved because of its pizeoelectric properties. Normal Vash'Knaaren get stunned by electricity. Depleated Vash'Knaaren crystals can connect to standard electronic machinary, as long as it's not too strong. This allows them to interface with other races technology. 
